resources: add scripts to make and extract arm kernel (#60)
gem5/gem5-resources: src/ubuntu-generic-diskimages/make-kernel-and-gem5-bridge-driver.md

# Make Kernel and the gem5 Bridge Driver

This document outlines the steps to build a Linux kernel and its modules with the gem5-bridge driver for the ARM Ubuntu disk images. Below are separate instructions for Ubuntu 24.04 and Ubuntu 22.04.

**Note**: These dockerfiles assume that you are running on arm host to build them. If you are not on ARM host then you would need to use a cross compiler to make the kernel and the modules.

## Table of Contents

- [Ubuntu 24.04 Disk Image](#ubuntu-2404-disk-image)
- [Ubuntu 22.04 Disk Image](#ubuntu-2204-disk-image)

## **Ubuntu 24.04 Disk Image**

### Build the Docker Image

- Navigate to the `24.04-dockerfile` directory and build the Docker image:

  ```bash

>   cd src/ubuntu-generic-diskiamges/24.04-dockerfile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cd src/ubuntu-generic-diskimages/24.04-dockerfile
```

  docker build -t ubuntu-kernel-build .
  cd ..
  ```

### Build the Kernel and Modules

- Create a container from the built image:

  ```bash
  docker create --name kernel-builder ubuntu-kernel-build
  ```

- Start the container to build the kernel:

  ```bash
  docker start -a kernel-builder
  ```

- Copy the kernel and modules to the host:

  ```bash
  mkdir my-arm-6.8.12-kernel
  docker cp kernel-builder:/workspace/linux-6.8.0/vmlinux my-arm-6.8.12-kernel/
  docker cp kernel-builder:/workspace/output/lib/modules/6.8.12 my-arm-6.8.12-kernel/
  ```

- Clean up the container:

  ```bash
  docker rm kernel-builder
  ```

### Verify Output

- Check the contents of `my-arm-6.8.12-kernel`:

  ```bash
  ls my-arm-6.8.12-kernel/
  ```

  You should see:
  - `vmlinux` — The built kernel image.
  - `6.8.12/` — Directory containing the kernel modules.

### Add Kernel Modules to the Disk Image

> - Add a Packer file provisioner to copy the modules to the disk image:

Reviewer: Might be good to specify that they should paste this below the other file provisioners, in case it matters that it's not below the shell provisioner, and that the path is `ubuntu-generic-diskimages/packer-scripts/arm-ubuntu.pkr.hcl`.

  ```hcl
  provisioner "file" {
    destination = "/home/gem5"
    source      = "my-arm-6.8.12-kernel/6.8.12"
  }
  ```

> - Update the post-install script to move the modules into the correct location and regenerate the initramfs:

Reviewer: Might be good to specify the path to the script as `ubuntu-generic-diskimages/scripts/post-installation.sh` and also mention a specific place in the script that the snippet could go, such as above `echo "Post Installation Done"
`.

  ```bash
  mv /home/gem5/6.8.12 /lib/modules/6.8.12
  depmod --quick -a 6.8.12
  update-initramfs -u -k 6.8.12
  ```

### Build the Disk Image

- Build the disk image using your build script:

  ```bash
  ./build-arm.sh 24.04
  ```

### Test with gem5

- Use the disk image and the kernel to run a gem5 filesystem simulation, ensuring the new kernel and modules are correctly set up.

## **Ubuntu 22.04 Disk Image**

### Build the Docker Image

- Navigate to the `22.04-dockerfile` directory and build the Docker image:

  ```bash

>   cd src/ubuntu-generic-diskiamges/22.04-dockerfile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cd src/ubuntu-generic-diskimages/22.04-dockerfile
```

  docker build -t ubuntu-22.04-kernel-build .
  cd ..
  ```

### Build the Kernel and Modules

- Create a container from the built image:

  ```bash
  docker create --name kernel-builder ubuntu-22.04-kernel-build
  ```

- Start the container to build the kernel:

  ```bash
  docker start -a kernel-builder
  ```

- Copy the kernel and modules to the host:

  ```bash
  mkdir my-arm-5.15.167-kernel
  docker cp kernel-builder:/workspace/linux-5.15.0/vmlinux my-arm-5.15.167-kernel/
  docker cp kernel-builder:/workspace/output/lib/modules/5.15.167 my-arm-5.15.167-kernel/
  ```

- Clean up the container:

  ```bash
  docker rm kernel-builder
  ```

### Verify Output

- Check the contents of `my-arm-5.15.167-kernel`:

  ```bash
  ls my-arm-5.15.167-kernel/
  ```

  You should see:
  - `vmlinux` — The built kernel image.
  - `5.15.167/` — Directory containing the kernel modules.

### Add Kernel Modules to the Disk Image

> - Add a Packer file provisioner to copy the modules to the disk image:

Reviewer: Same comments as above; path and location in script

  ```hcl
  provisioner "file" {
    destination = "/home/gem5"

>     source      = "my-arm-5.15.167-kernel"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    source      = "my-arm-5.15.167-kernel/5.15.167"
```

  }
  ```

> - Update the post-install script to move the modules into the correct location and regenerate the initramfs:

Reviewer: Same comments as above; path and location in script.

  ```bash
  mv /home/gem5/5.15.167 /lib/modules/5.15.167
  depmod --quick -a 5.15.167
  update-initramfs -u -k 5.15.167
  ```

### Build the Disk Image

- Build the disk image using your build script:

  ```bash
  ./build-arm.sh 22.04
  ```

### Test with gem5

> - Use the disk image and the kernel to run a gem5 filesystem simulation, ensuring the new kernel and modules are correctly set up.

Reviewer: You may also want to consider including an example, such as the following:
```
image = DiskImageResource("/path/to/gem5-resources/src/ubuntu-generic-diskimages/arm-disk-image-22-04/arm-ubuntu")
image._root_partition = "2"

board.set_kernel_disk_workload(
    kernel=KernelResource("/path/to/gem5-resources/src/ubuntu-generic-diskimages/my-arm-5.15.167-kernel/vmlinux"),
    disk_image=image,
    bootloader=obtain_resource("arm64-bootloader-foundation"),
)

```

# Make kernel and the gem5 bridge driver

This document will highlight the steps needed to make a kernel and its modules with the gem5-bridge driver.

## Ubuntu 24.04 disk image

Assuming you are in the `src/ubuntu-generic-diskiamges` directory. 
`cd` to the `24.04-dockerfile` directory and build the docker image.

```bash
cd 24.04-dockerfile
docker build -t ubuntu-kernel-build .
cd ..
```

Then lets make a new directory called `my-arm-6.8.12-kernel`.
This directory will have the kernel source and the modules of our built kernel.

```bash
mkdir my-arm-6.8.12-kernel
```

lets get the kernel source from `apt source`, we will be making the `6.8.12 96.8.0-47-generic)` kernel.

```bash
cd my-arm-6.8.12-kernel

> apt source linux-image-unsigned-6.8.0-47-generic

Reviewer 2: If this is run on the host, then you've made this quite host-dependent. E.g., it probably won't work on x86.

Author: I have moved the building process to the dockerfile instead of host.

```

You might need to update ubuntu source list to use the above command.
Checkout this post if you need to update: <https://askubuntu.com/questions/1512042/ubuntu-24-04-getting-error-you-must-put-some-deb-src-uris-in-your-sources-list>

Lets make an output directory that will have our built modules

```bash
mkdir output
```

Lets run the docker image from the `my-arm-6.8.12-kernel` directory.

```bash

> docker run --rm -it -u $UID:$GID -v ./linux-6.8.0:/workspace/source -v ./output:/workspace/output --name kernel-builder ubuntu-kernel-build

Reviewer 2: You should not run a docker container interactively. Write a script and execute the script in the docker container.

```

Now in the docker terminal, lets build the kernel

```bash
cd source
chmod a+x debian/rules
chmod a+x debian/scripts/*

> chmod a+x debian/scripts/misc/*

Reviewer 2: This should not be required. If it is, you're doing something wrong.

Author: I removed these statements and the kernel compilation works.

make defconfig
make -j$nproc
```

The above commands will make the kernel and the modules.
lets install the modules to the output directory

```bash
make INSTALL_MOD_PATH=/workspace/output modules_install
```

After the modules are installed, lets install our gem5-bridge driver.

in the `/workspace/source`, lets get the driver files

```bash

> git clone https://github.com/nkrim/gem5.git --depth=1 --filter=blob:none --no-checkout --sparse --single-branch --branch=gem5-bridge

Reviewer 2: get this committed to gem5 and use the gem5 source.

```bash
rm output/lib/modules/6.8.12/build
```

now add the following file provisioner to move the files from host to the disk

```hcl
  provisioner "file" {
    destination= "/home/gem5"
    source = "my-arm-6.8.12-kernel/output/lib/modules/6.8.12"
  }
```

also add the following lines in the post install script to move the modules to `/lib/modules` and run `depmode` and `initramfs`

```bash
mv /home/gem5/6.8.12 /lib/modules/6.8.12
depmod --quick -a 6.8.12
update-initramfs -u -k 6.8.12
```

Now you can run a gem5 fs simulation with this disk and the kernel we just made to use the new gem 5-bridge driver.

## Unutu 22.04 disk image

Assuming you are in the `src/ubuntu-generic-diskiamges` directory.
`cd` to the `22.04-dockerfile` directory and build the docker image.

```bash
cd 22.04-dockerfile
docker build -t ubuntu-22.04-kernel-build .
cd ..
```

Then lets make a new directory called `my-arm-5.15.167-kernel`.
This directory will have the kernel source and the modules of our built kernel.

```bash
mkdir my-arm-5.15.167-kernel
```

Now lets give permissions to this diretory so that we can copy the modules and the kerenl from the docker image.

```bash

>  chmod 777 my-arm-5.15.167-kernel

Reviewer 2: This should not be needed.

### Add Kernel Modules to the Disk Image

> - Add a Packer file provisioner to copy the modules to the disk image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a Packer file provisioner to copy the modules to the disk image. The Packer script is located at `ubuntu-generic-diskimages/packer-scripts/arm-ubuntu.pkr.hcl`.
```

> Make sure that this provisioner is added before the shell provisioner as we will used these files in the `post-installation.sh`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that this provisioner is added before the shell provisioner, as these files are used when the shell provisioner runs`post-installation.sh`:
```

  }
  ```

> - Update the post-install script to move the modules into the correct location and regenerate the initramfs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the following code snippet to the post-install script to move the modules into the correct location and regenerate the initramfs. The post-install script is located at `ubuntu-generic-diskimages/scripts/post-installation.sh`.
```

> Make sure the modules are moved before using `gem5-bridge` or compiling benchmarks with `gem5-bridge`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure the modules are moved before using `gem5-bridge` or compiling benchmarks with `gem5-bridge`, i.e. add the snippet before the line `echo "Building and installing gem5-bridge (m5) and libm5"`:
```

### Add Kernel Modules to the Disk Image

> - Add a Packer file provisioner to copy the modules to the disk image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a Packer file provisioner to copy the modules to the disk image. The Packer script is located at `ubuntu-generic-diskimages/packer-scripts/arm-ubuntu.pkr.hcl`.
```

Make sure that this provisioner is added before the shell provisioner as we will used these files in the `post-installation.sh`:

  ```hcl
  provisioner "file" {
    destination = "/home/gem5"
    source      = "my-arm-5.15.167-kernel/5.15.167"
  }
  ```

> - Update the post-install script to move the modules into the correct location and regenerate the initramfs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the following code snippet to the post-install script to move the modules into the correct location and regenerate the initramfs. The post-install script is located at `ubuntu-generic-diskimages/scripts/post-installation.sh`.
```

> Make sure the modules are moved before using `gem5-bridge` or compiling benchmarks with `gem5-bridge`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure the modules are moved before using `gem5-bridge` or compiling benchmarks with `gem5-bridge`, i.e. add the snippet before the line `echo "Building and installing gem5-bridge (m5) and libm5"`:
```

### Test with gem5

> - Use the disk image and the kernel to run a gem5 filesystem simulation, ensuring the new kernel and modules are correctly set up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the disk image and the kernel to run a gem5 filesystem simulation, ensuring the new kernel and modules are correctly set up. See the bottom of this file for an example.
```

> - You can use the following code snipped to use the disk image and kernel you made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can use the following code snippet to use the disk image and kernel you made.
```
